Chunking Strategies for Document Question Answering

Text chunking is a critical preprocessing step in any RAG pipeline. The goal is to split a
document into segments that are:
  - Small enough to fit within the context window of the language model.
  - Large enough to contain a coherent, self-contained piece of information.
  - Overlapping at their boundaries so that cross-boundary context is not lost.

Fixed-Size Chunking

The simplest approach is to split text every N characters or tokens, regardless of sentence
boundaries. While easy to implement, this method often splits sentences mid-way, degrading
retrieval quality.

Sentence-Aware Chunking

A better strategy is to split on natural boundaries first:
  1. Paragraph breaks (\n\n)
  2. Single newlines
  3. Sentence-ending punctuation (". ", "! ", "? ")

Hard character splitting is used only as a fallback when a segment exceeds the maximum chunk
size. This approach preserves semantic coherence within chunks.

Overlapping Chunks

Adding a configurable overlap (e.g., 10–15 % of chunk_size) between consecutive chunks ensures
that a sentence spanning two chunks is fully present in at least one. A typical configuration is:

  chunk_size    = 512 characters
  chunk_overlap = 64  characters   (12.5 % overlap)

Empirical results show that sentence-aware chunking with overlap improves retrieval relevance by
25–35 % compared to fixed-size chunking without overlap on standard question-answering datasets.

Metadata Enrichment

Each chunk should carry metadata extracted from the source document:
  - source path
  - page number (for PDFs)
  - section heading
  - author / date

This metadata enables post-retrieval filtering (e.g., "only documents from 2023") and
attribution in generated answers.

Chunk Size Tuning

Optimal chunk size depends on the embedding model's maximum sequence length and the average
length of answers:
  - Short answers (definitions, facts): chunk_size ≈ 256–512 chars.
  - Long answers (explanations, procedures): chunk_size ≈ 512–1024 chars.
  - Very long context models (e.g., GPT-4 Turbo): chunks can be up to 4000 chars, enabling
    retrieval of full document sections.

Benchmarking different chunk sizes and overlaps via offline evaluation (e.g., using RAGAS or
TruLens) is the recommended approach for optimising retrieval quality.
